Open Science Pre-Registration for Empathy project
================

# Registration Metadata

**Title**: Production, perception, and processing of prosody in second
language acquisition

**Description**: Specifically, we look at the role of empathy in the
development of L2 prosody by analyzing the perception of intonation in
questions and statements in L2 Spanish.

**Contributors**: *to be added via osf.io*

**Category**: Project

**Affiliated institutions**:

**License**: TBD

**Subjects**: Social and Behavioral Sciences

**Tags**:

# Study Information

The purpose of this project is to study the production, perception, and
processing of prosody in second language acquisition. This research
looks at the role of individual pragmatic skills in the process of
learning a new language. Specifically, we look at the role of empathy in
the development of L2 prosody by analyzing the perception of intonation
in questions and statements in L2 Spanish.

The objectives of this research are twofold. First, the project intends
contribute to cumulative science by conceptually replicating the Brandl
et al. (2020) finding demonstrating that perception and processing of L2
intonation improves in conjunction with L2 proficiency and as a function
of intonation type. Second, this research will extend the current
findings on perceptual development to include pragmatic skills,
specifically empathy.

This research builds on recent studies looking at the role of individual
pragmatic skills in language processing and extends them to the field of
second language acquisition. Concretely, we look at the role of empathy
in the development of L2 prosody by analyzing the perception of
intonation in questions and statements in L2 Spanish. L2 learners
gradually acquire Spanish prosody as they gain proficiency in the
language. The extant literature shows that ‘yes/no’-type questions
harder to process and acquire, when compared with simple statements
(Brandl et al., 2020). Recent research has also shown that empathy
influences native language processing in how listeners interpret
intonation and meaning when words are ambiguous (Esteve-Gilbert et al.,
2020). Specifically, higher empathy individuals, in comparison with
lower empathy individuals, appear to be more sensitive to intonation
cues in the process of forming sound-meaning associations. In short,
individuals with more pragmatic skill (higher empathy) are able to use
intonation to resolve temporary lexical ambiguity that can lead to
confirmatory vs. contrasting interpretations. This research underscores
the importance of considering individual pragmatic differences when
examining intonational meaning processing and sentence comprehension.
Thus, we extend this research to second language acquisition in order to
determine if individual differences in pragmatic skill affect the
development of intonation in L2 processing and sentence comprehension.

### Hypotheses

Research question 1: Is perceptional development in L2 Spanish modulated
by proficiency and intonation type (i.e., Brandl et al., 2020).  
Hypothesis: Accuracy will increase and processing time will decrease as
a function of proficiency and intonation type. Yes-no questions will
present the most difficulty for L2 learners of Spanish.

Research question 2: Do pragmatic skills modulate rate of development in
L2 prosody?  
Hypothesis: Based on the findings of Esteve-Gilbert et al. (2020), we
posit that prosodic development will occur sooner and at a faster rate
in higher empathy individuals. In this operationalization, ‘sooner’
refers to lower proficiency levels in a cross-sectional design.

Research question 3: Does speaker variety affect perception accuracy?  
Hypothesis: Based on tentative findings from native speaker pilot data,
we hypothesize that overall L2 learners will have most difficulty (lower
accuracy, slower RTs) with the Cuban speaker.

# Design Plan

### Study type

Observational Study - Data is collected from study subjects that are not
randomly assigned to a treatment. This includes surveys, “natural
experiments,” and regression discontinuity designs.

### Blinding

No blinding is involved in this study.

### Is there any additional blinding in this study?

There is no additional blinding in this study.

### Study design

The study consists of three tasks, given in the following order: 2AFC,
LexTALE, and Empathy quotient.

In the 2AFC task participants will be presented an audio file containing
a statement (declarative: broad focus or narrow focus) or a question
(yes-no or wh-). Their task is to determine, as quickly and as
accurately as possible, if the utterance they hear is a question or a
statement. Specifically, they will respond to the question “Is this a
question” using the keyboard. They will type ‘1’ for “yes” (meaning
“yes, this is a question”) and ‘0’ for ‘no’ (meaning “no, this is not a
question”). The stimuli consist of 64 critical items, 16 of each
sentence type. To generate the stimuli, we recorded native Spanish
speakers of 8 different varieties (Cuban, Castilian, Andalusian,
Puertorican, Chilean, Argentinean, Mexican, and Peruvian). The 8 native
speakers all produced the same 64 critical items. We segmented the all
utterances using Praat and normalized them for peak intensity. The 2AFC
task consists of 64 trials in which the stimuli presented are randomized
across speaker variety. Each variety has the same probability of being
selected on a given trial, such that, on average, a given participant
will hear each variety approximately 8 times. The 2AFC task will be
administered online using Psychopy and participants will be recruited
using Prolific. The task takes approximate 5 minutes to complete.

The LexTALE task is lexical decision experiment in which the
participants are presented a real and nonsense words (in Spanish). They
decide if the word they are presented in real or not using the keyboard
(‘1’ for real, ‘0’ for fake). The purpose of the LexTALE task is to get
an assessment of the participants vocabulary size in Spanish, which is
assumed to be a proxy for Spanish proficiency. The LexTALE task takes
approximately 5 minutes to complete.

Finally, participants will complete the Empathy Quotient (EQ,
Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004), a 60-item questionnaire that presents
lykert-type items ranging from ‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly disagree’.
The EQ is scored to produce a single value indicating an individual’s
level of empathy. The EQ takes approximately 7 minutes to complete.

### Randomization

Target items for all tasks (2AFC, LexTALE, Empathy quotient) are
presented randomly via PsychoPy. In the case of the 2AFC task, target
items (auditory stimuli) are drawn randomly from 8 distinct varieties of
Spanish. No other randomization is necessary.

# Sampling Plan

### Existing Data

We have data from 100 native Spanish speakers.

### Explanation of existing data

We piloted the 2AFC experiment on 100 native Spanish speakers to assure
critical item quality and assess the difficulty of the task.

### Data collection procedures\*

We will recruit 250 human participants for the remainder of this study.
Participants will be adult native speakers of English with varied levels
of proficiency in Spanish (determined by the LexTALE task). Participants
will be recruited via Prolific and will be compensated at a rate of
$9.52 per hour for their time. We estimate the task will take
approximately 17 minutes to complete, thus each participant will receive
$2.70 for completing all 3 tasks.

### Sample size\*

All participants will be native speakers of American English who range
from functionally monolingual to highly proficient in Spanish
(bilinguals). All participants with knowledge of Spanish will be second
language learners, operationally defined as having begun the endeavor of
learning Spanish after the age of 13.

### Sample size rationale

Following Brandl et al. (2020), we assume the effect size for perceptual
learning to be moderate in terms of the criteria set forth for L2
research by Plonsky et al. (2015?) (Cohen’s D = 0.600, Pearson’s r =
0.287). Based on this assumption, we estimate that we will need 94
participants to have and 80% chance of capturing the proficiency effect
with a type II error rate of 5%. Our hypotheses related to empathy as a
possible mediator of perceptual learning is exploratory and thus we do
not base our sample size estimate on any parameter estimates related to
this effect. That being said, we believe the aforementioned exploratory
effect is likely small in nature, and, considering the resources
necessary and available to us, we will recruit up to 150 more
participants.

``` r
seqtest::size.cor(rho = 0, delta = 0.287, 
         alternative = "two.sided",
         alpha = 0.05, beta = 0.2, output = TRUE)
```

    ## 
    ## Sample size determination for Pearson's correlation coefficient
    ## 
    ##   optimal sample size: n = 94 
    ## 
    ##   H0: rho = 0  versus  H1: rho != 0 
    ##   alpha: 0.05  beta: 0.2  delta: 0.287

### Stopping rule

We will stop data collection once a total of 350 participants (100
native speakers + 250 L2 learners) have completed all tasks.

# Variables

### Manipulated variables

Our experiment will manipulate a ‘condition’ variable that refers to the
sentence type. Specifically, we will present auditory stimuli that
include declarative (broad focus, narrow focus) and interrogative
(yes-no/polar/total, wh-/non-polar/partial) sentences. The sentence
stimuli are audio recordings spoken by native Spanish speakers of
different varieties.

### Measured variables\*

For the 2AFC task there are two measured variables: response and
response time. The first outcome variable is participants’ responses to
the auditory stimuli, i.e., if they respond ‘1’ (‘yes, this is a
question’) vs. ‘0’ (‘no, this is not a question’). The measured variable
is categorical and will be coded as-is, i.e., ‘1’ for ‘1’ key responses
and ‘0’ for ‘0’ key responses. The second outcome variable is
participants’ response time, that is, the time in ms a participant takes
to make a response.

Our experiment will measure vocabulary size via the LexTALE task, which
will be used as a proxy for language proficiency and entered into our
analysis as a continuous predictor. Finally, we will include a measure
of the construct *empathy* based on the Empathy Quotient (Baron-Cohen &
Wheelwright, 2004). The empathy score for each participant will also be
entered into our analysis as a continuous predictor.

### Indices

NA

# Analysis Plan

### Statistical models\*

We utilize Bayesian data analysis for statistical inferences. For the
response data we will fit a hierarchical logistic regression model in
which the response (‘1’, ‘0’) is fit as a function of *empathy* (empathy
quotient score), and *proficiency* (LexTALE score). The random effects
structure will include by-participant random intercepts, as well as
random intercepts for items nested within question type, nested within
speaker variety, i.e.,
`response ~ proficiency * empathy + (1 | id) + (1 | speaker_variety/question_type/item)`.
The model will use regularizing, weakly informative priors.

### Transformations

The proficiency and empathy predictors will be standardized to have a
mean of 0 and scale 1.

### Inference criteria

We will sample the posterior distribution of the model for statistical
inferences. A region of practical equivalence (ROPE) will be established
around a point null value of 0 (Kruschke, 2018) using the following
formula:

$$\\frac{\\mu\_1 - \\mu\_2}{\\sqrt{\\frac{\\sigma\_1^2 + \\sigma\_2^2}{2}}}$$

For all models, median posterior point estimates are reported for each
parameter of interest, along with the 95% highest density interval
(HDI), the percent of the region of the HDI contained within the ROPE,
and the maximum probability of effect (MPE). For statistical inferences,
a posterior distribution for a parameter β in which 95% of the HDI falls
outside the ROPE and a high MPE (i.e., values close to 1) were taken as
compelling evidence for a given effect. The analyses will be conducted
in R and models fit using `stan` via the R package `brms` (Bürkner,
2018).

### Data exclusion

We will exclude data according to the following criteria:

-   Error during data collection
-   Clear lack of understanding or engagement during the task, i.e., all
    1 responses.

### Missing data

Our models are robust to missing data, thus no specific measures will be
taken to account for this possibility.

### Exploratory analysis

Given that the construct *empathy* is particularly understudied in SLA
research, our analysis of this construct is exploratory in nature. Based
on Esteve-Gilbert et al. (2020), we posit that learners with higher
empathy levels may be more attuned to intonational variability.
Specifically, we hypothesize that the effect of empathy on perceptual
learning will be additive, thus higher empathy learners may perform
better on the 2AFC task at lower levels of proficiency.

# Other

NA

# References

-   Brandl, A., González, C., & Bustin, A. (2020). The development of
    intonation in l2 spanish: A perceptual study. In A.
    Morales-Front, M. J. Ferreira, R. P. Leow, & C. Sanz (Eds.),
    Hispanic linguistics: Current issues and new directions (pp. 12–31).
    John Benjamins Publishing Company.

-   Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004). The empathy quotient: An
    investigation of adults with asperger syndrome or high functioning
    autism, and normal sex differences. Journal of Autism and
    Developmental Disorders, 34(2), 163–175.
